  After rule by the Ottoman Empire ended there in World War I (1914C18), the
Gaza area became part of the League of Nations mandate of Palestine under British
rule. Before this mandate ended, the General Assembly of the United Nations (UN) in
November 1947 accepted a plan for the Arab-Jewish partition of Palestine under
which the town of Gaza and an area of surrounding territory were to be allotted to the
Arabs. The British mandate ended on May 15, 1948, and on that same day the
first Arab-Israeli war began. Egyptian forces soon entered the town of Gaza, which
became the headquarters of the Egyptian expeditionary force in Palestine. As a result
of heavy fighting in autumn 1948, the area around the town under Arab occupation
was reduced to a strip of territory 25 miles (40 km) long and miles wide. 
This area became known as the Gaza Strip. Its boundaries were demarcated in the
Egyptian-Israeli armistice agreement of February 24, 1949.
  In the Six-Day War of June 1967, the Gaza Strip was again taken by Israel,
which occupied the region for the next quarter century. In December 1987 rioting and
violent street clashes between Gaza Palestinians and occupying Israeli troops
marked the birth of an uprising that came to be known as the intifada . In 1994 
Israel began a phased transfer of governmentalauthority in the Gaza Strip 
to the Palestinian Authority (PA) under the terms of the Oslo Accords that were signed 
by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization(PLO). The fledgling Palestinian government, 
led by Yasser Arafat, struggled withsuch problems as a stagnant economy, divided popular 
support, stalled negotiationswith Israel over further troop withdrawals and territoriality, 
and the threat of terrorism from militant Muslim groups such as Islamic Jihad and Hamas, 
which refused to compromise with Israel and were intent on derailing the peace process. Beginning in
late 2000, a breakdown in negotiations between the PA and Israel was followed by a
further, more extreme outbreak of violence, termed the second, intifada. In
an effort to end the fighting, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon announced in late
2003 a plan that centred on withdrawing Israeli soldiers and settlers from the Gaza
Strip. In September 2005 Israel completed the pullout from the territory, and control
of the Gaza Strip was transferred to the PA, although Israel continued to patrol its
borders and airspace. 
Under governance
  In the 2006 PA parliamentary elections, Fatahwhich had dominated Palestinian
politics since its founding in the 1950ssuffered a decisive loss to Hamas, reflecting
years of dissatisfaction with Fatah governance, which was criticized as corrupt and
inefficient. Hamas victory prompted sanctions by Israel, the United States, and the
European Union, each of which had placed the organization on its official list of
terrorist groups. The Gaza Strip was the site of escalating violence between the
competing groups, and a short-lived coalition government was ended in June 2007
after Hamas took control of the Gaza Strip and a Fatah-led emergency cabinet took
control of the West Bank. Despite calls by PA Pres. Mahmoud Abbas for Hamas to
relinquish its position in the Gaza Strip, the territory remained under Hamas control. 
Attempts at reconciliation with Fatah
  A number of attempts were made to reconcile with the Fatah-led PA. An initial
deal was reached in 2011 but did not bring about much change. A new deal was
achieved in 2014, in which Hamas agreed to hand over administration of the Gaza
Strip to the PA and recognize the prime ministership of Rami Hamdallah. As such, the
Hamas government in the Gaza Strip resigned, including the prime minister, Ismail
Haniyeh. The PA was not allowed to resume control of public institutions in the Gaza
Strip until late 2017, however, after implementation of a new agreement. The PA
failed to gain full governance in the area, though, and decided to cut funding to the
Gaza Strip in 2018. As disagreements continued to escalate, the PA ceased operating
the Rafah border crossing with Egypt in January 2019. Later that month Hamdallah
resigned, ending the unity government.
Blockade of Gaza Strip
  In autumn 2007, Israel declared the Gaza Strip under Hamas, a hostile entity, and
approved a series of sanctions that included power cuts, heavily restricted imports, 
and border closures. In January 2008, facing sustained rocket assaults into its southern
settlements, Israel broadened its sanctions, completely sealing its border with the
Gaza Strip and temporarily preventing fuel imports. Later that month, after nearly a
week of the intensified Israeli blockade, Hamas forces demolished portions of the
barrier along the Gaza Strip-Egypt border (closed from Hamas mid-2007 takeover
until 2011), opening gaps through which, according to some estimates, hundreds of
thousands of Gazans passed into Egypt to purchase food, fuel, and goods unavailable
under the blockade. Egyptian Pres. Hosni Mubarak temporarily permitted the breach
to alleviate civilian hardship in Gaza before efforts could begin to restore the border. 
  In the years after the Israeli blockade on Gaza was instated, an organization
known as the Free Gaza Movement made a number of maritime efforts to breach it. The first 
such mission which consisted of a pair of vessels bearing medical supplies
and some 45 activists was permitted to reach Gaza in August 2008, and four
missions in subsequent months were also successful. In May 2010 a flotilla bound for
Gaza was the scene of a clash between activists and Israeli commandos in which 9 of
the more than 600 activists involved were killed.
  Under Mubarak, Egypt cooperation in enforcing the blockade was deeply
unpopular with the Egyptian public. In May 2011, four months after a popular
uprising in Egypt forced Mubarak to step down as president, Egypt interim
government announced that it would permanently reopen the Rafah border crossing, 
allowing Palestinians to pass between Egypt and Gaza. About 1,200 people were
allowed to cross the border daily, though it remained closed for trade. However, in the
turmoil following the ouster of Egyptian Pres. Mohamed Morsi in the summer of
2013, traffic through the border crossing was reduced to 50 people per day because of
security concerns and was later closed altogether. 
  After the PA took control of the Rafah border crossing in late 2017, Egypt began
allowing 200 people per day to cross the border in May 2018. The border was closed
briefly after the PA quit the Gaza Strip in January 2019, but it was reopened weeks
later by Hamas. During this rare and prolonged easing of the border, tens of thousands
of Gazans were reported to have permanently emigrated from the Gaza Strip. 
  After months of violence between Israel and Hamas in mid-2018, Israel began to
ease restrictions on its blockade as a part of an effort to incentivize a more long-term
cease-fire agreement between the two. In 2019 Israel allowed the flow of additional
goods into and out of the territory, expanded the permitted fishing zone for Gazans to
its largest extent in more than a decade, and began allowing thousands of Gazans to
cross the border to work in Israel. 
  Qatar, meanwhile, began offering tens of millions of dollars in humanitarian aid
to the Gaza Strip at the end of 2018, after both Israel and Egypt agreed to allow the
aid. By 2021 it had disbursed nearly $400 million to the territory.